README.md, before:

# The EPA's Climate Change Site

President Trump [has ordered the EPA](http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-epa-climatechange-idUSKBN15906G) to remove their [climate change page](https://www.epa.gov/climatechange) from their website.

People are already working to download all the information there. This repository is intended to be a temporary solution to keep the material accessible on the web. They have a ton of information, so please open pull requests to add more pages to this collection.

If anyone knows of a similar project, please link to it here.

## Why is the climate changing?
- [Basic Information](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/basic_information.md)
- [Causes of Climate Change](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/causes_of_climate_change.md)
- Future of Climate Change
- Greenhouse Gas Emissions

## How is the climate changing?
- Climate Science
- Climate Indicators
- Climate Impacts
- Extreme Weather

## What can we do about this change?
- Reducing Emissions
- Adapting to Change
- [What EPA is Doing](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/what_epa_is_doing.md)
- [What You Can Do](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/what_you_can_do.md)

Commit message:

Add way back machine link

README.md, after:

# The EPA's Climate Change Site

President Trump [has ordered the EPA](http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-epa-climatechange-idUSKBN15906G) to remove their [climate change page](https://www.epa.gov/climatechange) from their website.

People are already working to download all the information there. This repository is intended to be a temporary solution to keep the material accessible on the web. They have a ton of information, so please open pull requests to add more pages to this collection.

[Here's the site on the Way Back Machine](https://web.archive.org/web/20170125022503/https://www.epa.gov/climatechange), in case it does go down super soon.

If anyone knows of a similar project, please link to it here.

## Why is the climate changing?
- [Basic Information](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/basic_information.md)
- [Causes of Climate Change](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/causes_of_climate_change.md)
- Future of Climate Change
- Greenhouse Gas Emissions

## How is the climate changing?
- Climate Science
- Climate Indicators
- Climate Impacts
- Extreme Weather

## What can we do about this change?
- Reducing Emissions
- Adapting to Change
- [What EPA is Doing](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/what_epa_is_doing.md)
- [What You Can Do](https://github.com/nickyr/epa-climate-change/blob/master/what_you_can_do.md)
